---
layout: single
title:  "Adler Analysis"
date:   2017-02-03 15:37:58 -0700
comments: true
categories: literature criticism methods adler non-fiction
---

## How to Read a Book

One of the books that has had the most impact on my reading, and consequently on
my life, is Mortimer J. Adler's _How to Read a Book_. For years after I heard
about the title, I snubbed the book and refused to have anything to do with it.
"After all!" I thought, "I've got a degree in English. I know all about reading.
I'm sure it is a good thing for people to read who struggled in K-12 with
reading, but not for me."

How mistaken I was.

I wish I had read this book at least by 9th grade. Instead, it was almost 10
years out of University. This book completely overhauled how I deal with
non-fiction writing, whether short snippets in a magazine, blog articles, or a
polished philsophical treatise.

First of all, Adler is uniquely qualified to have given us a guide for honing
our reading. He was a professor at one of the St. John's colleges for many
years. These colleges specialize in studying classics of the (primarily) Western
tradition such as Plato, Aristotle, Virgil, Bacon, Shakespeare, Kant, and more.
Adler was also a respected editor of the Encyclopedia Britannica, particularly
dealing with philosophy. He published a number of philosophical works himself
that were well-received.

In short, Adler devoted his life to thinking, reading to expand his thought, and
publishing and teaching to share what he had learned.


## About Adler Analysis

_How to Read a Book_ embodies Adlers technique, or collection of methodologies,
for approaching written works of various quality. He brings a light-hearted
pragmatism to issues that are often controversial in academic circles.

What makes a book good? It's worth reading once.

What makes a book great? It yields up riches each time it's read, as if it is
becomes a new book every 5 years or so.

And the list of great books is not going to be the same for everyone (even
though there will be a great deal of overlap between the greats lists of book
lovers).

Adler's methods work from more superficial and inspectional all the way to
microscopic, sometimes tedious analysis. Fortunately, the superficial methods
are useful in helping one sift through lesser books to get at better books.
Every now and then you come across a book worthy of the deep treatment.

In the next post, I'll be explaining Adler's methods, when and how to use them,
and what rewards to expect. For now I'll just say that I've found these
techniques to enrich my life far more than most things I've come across in my
life, but that they tend to apply to non-fiction much better than to fiction.
For fiction, I favor methods developed by other critics, and I'll write about
them soon.

